---
date: "2024-10-26"
external_link: https://rmcqualidadedoar.shinyapps.io/dados/
tags:
- Shiny App
- RMC Qualidade do Ar
- Dados Abertos
title: Projeto Qualidade do Ar na RMC
---

The intensive and extensive consumption of limited and non-renewable natural resources is proven to be the main source of emission of substances into the atmospheric air. Extractive and mineral processing industries are directly responsible not only for the decline of Earth's natural resources but also for the reallocation of mineral resources between environmental spheres. Brazil consolidated position as a major producer of agricultural commodities and related food products worldwide is owned to its mineral wealth. The State of Paraná, in southern Brazil, plays a fundamental role in the exploration of strategic minerals, contributing notably to Brazilian self-sufficiency in the production of limestone (essential for agricultural activities, but also for civil construction). By the addition of large amounts of substances to the environment, limestone mining and cement industry have been contributing significantly to air pollution and environmental inequality. Since July 2023, an air quality monitoring network of sensors has been operating in a region surrounded by consolidated limestone mining and one of the world’s largest cement plants. The network includes five cities that have been equipped with particles and gases monitors (PM2.5, PM10, CO, SO2, NO2, and O3) of varying performance and cost effectiveness (i.e., PurpleAir, and Thermo GM-5000). Although within 3 km of the cement plant, prevailing winds conditions favors the arrival of air pollutants from mining areas within 5 – 10 km from the sites. These conditions seem to be promoting pollution spillovers, which may result in environmental costs exports among neighboring cities. The concentration of PM, SO2, and NO2, mostly produced by the high energy demand, violated air quality standards. Recently, the search for a replacement of fossil fuel have been promoting the burning of urban solid waste in cement kilns. If enough of the poisonous byproducts of burning waste escape, they can be hazardous for humans and animals in the surrounding area. Measurements campaigns have been conducted to fully characterize the life cycle of those air pollutants. Daily PM2.5 aerosol samples have been collected for future analysis of trace elements and new and emergent pollutants as well as its cytotoxicity. Combined with several modelling approaches, the obtained data will allow the characterization of the region air pollutants emission profile and to assess health risks. Our study suggests that the specific air pollution transboundary should be considered when designing urban planning and development zoning regulations to safeguard the wellbeing of populations and the environment.

<!--more-->
